The rules that keep me safe,
even when I don't feel it yet.
My name is Isaac Iqbal,
and I want to tell you something about the rules you follow,
because to you,
they might feel like paperwork,
policies or procedures,
but to me,
they are the difference between being safe
and not being safe.
When my brain senses danger,
my amygdala reacts first.
It does not wait.
It does not check facts.
It does not think about whether I am actually safe.
It just tells my body
something is wrong.
That's why I don't always act the way you expect.
My prefrontal cortex,
the part that helps me think,
make decisions,
and control my behavior,
goes offline when I feel threatened.
So when I shout or shut down
or push you away,
I am not choosing to behave that way.
My nervous system is trying to protect me,
and this is where your rules matter.
The Children Act says my welfare must come first.
That means when something doesn't feel right.
You are not allowed to ignore it,
even if I don't say anything,
even if I act like I don't care,
you still have to act.
Working together to safeguard children means you
don't deal with things on your own,
because sometimes
one adult is not enough to keep me safe.
So you share information,
you speak to others,
you make sure nothing gets missed,
even when it's uncomfortable.
The Children's home's regulations mean I should feel safe where I live.
Not just physically safe,
but emotionally safe too.
That means how you speak to me matters,
how consistent you are matters.
Because
my brain is always asking,
is this place safe?
The Human Rights Act means I matter,
even when I am angry,
even when I get things wrong,
even when I push people away.
I still have the right to be treated with dignity.
The Equality Act means I should not be treated differently because of who I am,
because sometimes
people like me get labeled,
misunderstood,
seen as a problem instead of a person.
The SCCIF
the way services are inspected.
That's how people check if I actually feel safe,
not just if boxes are ticked,
but if my experience is better,
if I am calmer,
if I am being understood.
And then there's something else you might not think about,
information.
The Data Protection Act says you must handle my information properly,
but it also means
if something is putting me at risk,
you need to share it,
because silence can be dangerous for someone like me.
When I have been hurt before,
my brain stays on high alert.
My body fills with cortisol.
I become hypervigilant.
I am always scanning,
always checking,
always waiting for something to go wrong.
So even when I am safe,
I might not feel safe.
That's why how you follow the rules matters,
because if you follow them without understanding me,
I will still feel unsafe.
But when you stay calm,
when you are consistent.
When you listen instead of react,
you help my nervous system settle.
That's called co-regulation.
You are helping my brain learn something new.
You are showing me
that adults can be safe.
My hippocampus starts to build new memories,
not just of fear,
but of safety,
of trust,
of someone staying,
even when I struggle.
A sad reality is this.
You can follow every policy,
every procedure,
every rule,
and I can still feel unsafe.
But when you understand why those rules exist,
and you apply them with care,
something changes.
You don't just protect me from harm,
you help my brain come out of survival mode.
Please understand this.
My brain learned survival before it learned safety,
so I need you to show me safety
again
and again
and again.
Because
for me,
safeguarding is not a policy,
it's how I experience you.
And when you get it right,
those rules you follow
don't just protect me,
they help me feel safe enough
to start healing.